Hello and Welcome!
------------------

Hello! And welcome to my Diary. My name is Isabelle Lobo and I am a
data-scientist (well an aspiring one at least :P)! I am a 20 year old
student at Amherst College majoring in statistics. The thing I love most
about statistics and Data Science are the tools they equip me with to
analyse data. And ofcourse the data science memes.

<img src="funny1.png" alt="Data Science Memes!" width="100%" />
<p class="caption">
Data Science Memes!
</p>

As a student of data-science at Amherst the shift to remote learning has
been challenging. But it has had so many positive outcomes. I have
learned to work on statistics projects with people in different time
zones and try to find solutions to my problems before I run to office
hours. But most importantly, the huge changes between my life before and
after COVID-19 has meant one thing. More! Data! To! Analyze!

How do I spend my time?
-----------------------

A major change and challenge of remote learning has been the complete
shift in how I schedule my time in the absence of the usual structures
in place when on campus.

I wanted to use the skills I have learned in my Data Science class to
try and figure out whether I was scheduling my time better before or
after COVID-19 and the shift to remote learning. Spending time in a
completely different timezone made me wonder how effecient/ ineffecient
the system of learning across timezones is. I wanted to see whether the
shift in the timezone has created major difference in the way I
scheduled my time between the mornings and the evenings.

Data Collection and Questions of Interest
-----------------------------------------

In order to collect the data I used my google calendar schedule from the
second week after the start of the semester and the second week after
the shift to remote learning. I tried to keep it to the second week to
avoid any instabilities during the one week period I usually take to
“acclimatise” to a new schedule.My main topic of interest was how I was
scheduling my time and not how I was sticking to the schedule so I used
my intended, pre-planned schedule for both weeks. (I would also like to
believe that I am a good student and I stick to my schedule :P)

<img src="schedule.jpg" alt="Me telling myself to follow my schedule" width="40%" />
<p class="caption">
Me telling myself to follow my schedule
</p>

Then I took all the data I had collected and used it to answer two main
questions:

-   1.  How did I divide my time before and after the shift to learning
        among my academics and other activities?

-   1.  How has the change in timezone changed the way in which I
        schedule my time between the morning and the evening?

Data Presentation and Insights
------------------------------

> *Question 1*: How did I divide my time before and after the shift to
> remote learning among my academics and other activities?

![Graph Comparing Number of
Timeslots](index_files/figure-markdown_strict/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)

My first graph compares the number of timeslots in a scheduled week per
activity type before and after COVID-19 struck and we shifted to remote
learning. I wanted to compare the number of timeslots to see whether I
was using more scheduling to plan out my week before and after in each
activity, which would indicate how many times I intended to place
importance on each activity in a week. As you can see,before remote
learning I had an overall minutely higher number of planned timeslots
(43 timeslots) a week than after (41 timeslots). However, it is
important to note that almost half of these went to planning my meals
and the least went to activities related to my health and wellness(2
timeslots). However, after COVID-19, I have more timeslots for my health
and wellness (11 timeslots to be exact), as well as extracurricular (4
timeslots as compared to 2 before) and athletics (10 timeslots as
compared to 5 before). There are no timeslots for my meals after and
Academic timeslots seem around the same for both. My conclusion after
deliberating about the data is that in college, having to plan out my
meals myself- such as when I could go with my friends, how much time it
would take me to go to the dining hall etc.- was very time consuming.
However back home, since my mother usually cooks, I did not have to
spend time thinking about what, where, when or with who I was going to
eat. This freed up a lot of time for me to focus on other areas of my
life such as my health and wellness and extracurricular. Since I had
access to all the extracurricular and health and wellness activities in
my house while on lockdown and did not have travel across campus this
also allowed me to spend more time on them.

    ## Don't know how to automatically pick scale for object of type difftime. Defaulting to continuous.

![Graph Comparing Average Duration of
Timeslots](index_files/figure-markdown_strict/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)
While number of timeslots in a week gave me an idea of what I was
focusing on, I also wanted to see whether there was a difference in the
amount of time I spent focusing on each activity. Hence I looked at the
average duration per week spent on each activity as shown in the
Lollipop Chart above. I used a lollipop chart because I think the idea
of spending time on an activity is analogous to the amount of time you
enjoy a lollipop for. I wanted to see how long- on average- I spent
enjoying each of the activities in a week. As you can see, the highest
average timeslot duration before was in Athletics (at around almost 125
minutes), and the lowest was in Health and Wellness (60 minutes) and
Extracurricular(60 minutes). After COVID-19, there is a dramatic drop in
the average duration of my athletics timeslot (to just 60 minutes), an
increase in health and wellness (to 87.5 minutes) and a complete drop to
0 in average scheduled timeslot of meals. There was a slight increase by
an average of 12.5 minutes of the average amount of time I scheduled for
my academics as well. From the data and graph, I can conclude that being
on the Varsity track team at Amherst involved me spending a larger time
in one go only on Athleticss. Coming back home allowed me to shorten the
intervals I spent on my Athletics, even though I increased the number of
times (as indicated by the increase in timeslots) I trained per week.
This allowed me to spend larger durations on my health and wellness,
other extracurricular and academics. Being able to take my meals at home
while I was doing other activities like academics or extracurricular
also helped free up my schedule to enjoy for longer durations my the
other activities.

> *Question 2*: How has the change in timezone changed the way in which
> I schedule my time between the morning and the evening?

![Graph Comparing Time of Day by
Activity](index_files/figure-markdown_strict/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)

To address my second question, I used a stacked bar graph which compares
the proportion of each Activity done during the first half of the day
(till 12 pm) and the second half of the day (from 12pm onward). I wanted
to see whether shifting timezones from the US back to India would affect
the time period at which I scheduled my daily activities. There were
significatn differences however they were not what I had expected. As
the graph shows, before COVID-19 and the shift to remote learning, the
entire proportion of my Athletic and Health and Wellness activities were
scheduled in the evening, my other Extracurricular were evenly spread
with 50% in the morning and 50% in the evening, and my Academics were
also almost evenly spread. The before graph seems to show more Activity
on a whole in the evening. Whereas the graph after COVID-19 and the
shift to remote learning, shows that am increase in the propotion of
most activities to the morning half of the day. The entire proportion of
Extracurricular activities are now scheduled in the morning, there is an
increase by around 10% in the proportion of Health and Wellness
activities in the morning, Athletic activity is now split evenly with
50% in the morning and 50% in the evening. Only Academics now has a
higher proportion (almost 75%) of activities in the evening. After
analyzing the graph, the conclusions I can draw are that surprisingly, I
started to schedule more of my activies during the morning half of the
day after the shift to remote learning although all my classes were now
in the evening because of the timezone difference. I believe this change
is because I am an early-bird so getting up early and having the whole
morning to utilise efficiently before classes in the evening allows me
to spend more time on my Health and Wellness, Athletics and
Extracurricular in the morning than I would have been able to at
Amherst.

Final Conclusions
-----------------

The data has shown me that although there have been several changes in
my schedule after the onset of COVID-19 and the shift to remote
learning, not all of them have necessarily been bad and I have been able
to see quite a few positive effects on my schedule. The first question
allowed me to conclude that I have been able to fit more number of
timeslots as well as amount of time for on health and wellness in my
schedule as well as divide my time in athletics more effeciently into
smaller timeslots. I also realised that a major advantage of being home
was that home-cooked food meant I did not have to worry about fitting my
meals into my schedule which opened up space for a lot of other
activities in my schedule. The second question showed me that I have
been able to optimise my day better with my mornings free to include a
lot of my extracurricular activities in the morning half with my
academics and classes now being scheduled in the evenings. I would like
to maybe look into and compare my findings of my intended schedule with
how I actually spend my day. I could track this in the future and
further my project and research. Stay tuned for my further research
which in honor of the fun theme of this project shall be named “Diary of
a \[Data Science Student\]: The Long Haul”.

Reflection
----------

This project has been one of my favorite projects this semester and
increased my fascination with Data Science. It was astounding to realise
that I could glean so many insights from simple calendar schedule. With
the skills I have acquired in this class, and through the project, I
have realised that as a Data Scientist anything can be converted into
data and the world is truly your oyster. Although it can be tiresome,
data wrangling is undoubtedly my favorite part of the process. Being
able to take information and transform it into the format you like feels
like magic every single time. What is equally exciting is when you take
this transformed data and transform it from simply words and numbers
into what can only be called data art. After wrangling my data and
creating visualizations, I gave my family a sneak peek into my diary and
it was amazing to see that they could understand and interpret patterns
in my schedule from just a few graphs. This has lead me to conclude that
data visualization is truly the best asset to depict any type of
information for any audience.

<img src="collectthedata.jpg" alt="How I feel when I look at any information:" width="50%" />
<p class="caption">
How I feel when I look at any information:
</p>

As an LJST and Statistics double major I have always been fascinated
with the legal and ethical grounds for data provision, construction and
use. In this project, I was given firsthand experience at being both a
data provider and data analyst which allowed me to further reflect on
these implications on both parties. This project showed me how easy it
is for big tech companies to gather information on patterns in our daily
lives. We often go about ticking the terms and conditions boxes on these
companies’ websites without a second glance, but does this mean we have
given them consent to use our data freely and without any restrictions?
There have been many legal cases- including against Facebook and the US
Government- protesting the violation of individuals privacy by data
collection. As a data provider, it makes me wonder whether checking the
terms and conditions box signs all my rights to privacy away to big tech
companies and the government. And are there other options or legal
frameworks available to users who are essentially coerced by their
necessity for technology into doing so? As a future data analyst, I
think it is my legal and ethical responsibility to let users know what
information I will be collecting and to limit my use of their data to
only the specified reasons for data collection I have made them aware
about. Ultimately, data collection can be a strong weapon if used
incorrectly, however with the correct legal and ethical framework it
serves to benefit the progress of society as a whole.

References
==========

-   Thank you to Albert Kim (Smith College) and Johanna Hardin (Pomona
    College) for the Google Calendar project idea. They credit Roger
    Peng’s and Hilary Parker’s **Not So Standard Deviations** podcast
    titled “Compromised Shoe Situation”
    (<a href="http://nssdeviations.com/size/5/?search=shoe" class="uri">http://nssdeviations.com/size/5/?search=shoe</a>),
    in which they discuss a data science design challenge on getting to
    work on time, for the inspiration.

-   Yupp, the title of this project is a play on the **Diary of a Wimpy
    Kid** book series. We’ve been reading A LOT of these books in my
    house these days. Many of the titles could be equally applicable
    here:
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: Cabin Fever
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: The Last Straw
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: Dog Days
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: The Ugly Truth
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: Hard Luck
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: The Long Haul
-   Diary of a \[Data Science Student\]: Old School
-   The \[Data Science Student\] *Do-It-Yourself* Book
